Milestone Project 4 
Data Centric Development

Design and Build an Interactive Cooking App.

App Name: Cook-e

Deployment: https://cook-e.herokuapp.com/

(TO BE UPDATED)

The project concept is from the perspective of a Technology Company ("Best Analytics") who produces dashboards and provides web design services. The main feature of the site is the dashboard which utilises D3, Crossfilter and DC.js. The data used is a dummy dataset for two franchises "New You" and "Fresh Look". It incorporates several interactive charts, a data count and a data table. The 'Consolidated Sales Chart' includes a brush feature to easily select different time periods.

The charts are all interrelated as they are all produced from the same data set. Clicking on a chart element will automatically filter and update all the other charts on the dashboard as well as the data table below. The charts have been laid out in a logical manner starting with the Financial Year chart for 2017 / 2018. Both the Country/ Region chart and Manager Chart are colour coded making it easier to identify which managers cover each part of the UK. The 'New You' chain has a green colour and the 'Fresh Look' chain has a blue colour on the pie chart and composite line chart below. Again, this is for ease of reference and enhanced user experience. The final chart looks at consolidated sales by period and includes a brush effect which works very well in conjunction with all the charts. This feature is particularly useful when used as part of the data table which has been placed immediately below for this reason.

UX
The project has been designed with the end user in mind. The end user being businesses predominantly who wish to utilise MI generated by their business graphically on a company website or as part of an independent dashboard. This might be to drive stakeholder engagement using an interactive charting tool.

To enhance the user experience a more modern one-page theme has been designed. It utilises the HTML scroll feature and jQuery to scroll to various sections of the website. As the user scrolls up & down the page the nav bar highlights the current section being viewed. The scroll feature is particularly important on a one page theme as without it the page will jump to to each section of the site. This can create confusion for the user leading them to believe that they are on a multipage site.

A preloader has been included in the dashboard section to notify the user that data is loading. Various elements have also been faded out on loading the page which fade back in to view slowly when loading is complete. jQuery was used for this purpose. Another aspect of the site is that when being viewed in portrait view on a mobile device an image is displayed instructing the user to rotate the device to landscape in order to view the dashboard.

To prevent poor user experience when viewing the dashboard section of the site in portrait mode on mobile devices a place holder is displayed. This communicates to the user the need to rotate the device to landscape view in order to view the dashboard.

The flow of the site has been created in a more modern one-page layout. Square edges and subtle use of shadow have been applied in order to make the various sections stand out.

A large 'call to action' button (Contact Us) has been placed in the header of the home screen. This call to action button occupies prime real estate in order to drive customer enquiries and contains a hover effect to improve the 'click through rate' and increase customer enquiries which would lead to sales. This aspect of the site recognises its commercial nature whilst enhancing the user experience by making it easy to get in touch within a couple of clicks.

A user may wish to perform the following actions:

utilise the example dashboard.
understand how the graphs and data table interact with each other through experimentation.
contact us via the contact form to arrange a consultation.
contact us more traditional means (post/phone/email).
reach out to us on social media.
The site provides all these options to the end user and is very easy to utilise and navigate.

Wireframes for this project are available here https://github.com/JayPeaa/milestone2/blob/master/wire-frames.pdf

Features
The main features of the site are:

Clear and Easy to Use Navigation
Interactive Dashboard
APIs - Google Maps, MailJS
Email subscription
Contact Form
Social Media for marketing and engagement purposes
Future development
The sample dataset includes customer information it would be possible to create additional charts to analyse customer behaviour and spend.

A secure log in section and online purchase options for potential customers would also be a valuable addition (e-commerce aspect).

Some additional work with AJAX and jQuery would help to provide an even more immersive customer experience when submitting contact forms.

Another development would be the inclusion of a database for email subscription as currently when a user submits an email via the subscription section an email is triggered as opposed to simply adding the user to a mailing list as part of a more automated process.

Integration of a blog would be a prerequisite for this type of site in order to generate greater volumes of organic traffic. Google Analytics should also be integrated to understand the numbers of visitors and their sources to better track the sites performance.

The site includes the Google Maps API which could be integrated more fully with Google Business to leverage some of the free yet powerful options provided by Google and make the site more discoverable by search engines.

Technologies
The site is built using HTML, CSS, jQuery, Bootstrap, D3.js, Crossfilter, DC.js, and JavaScript based technologies and Libraries. Usage of any libraries or CDNs is documented below:

CDN Usages
The following CDNs have been used to create this site.

https://maxcdn.bootstrapcdn.com/bootstrap/3.3.7/css/bootstrap.min.css https://stackpath.bootstrapcdn.com/font-awesome/4.7.0/css/font-awesome.min.css https://maxcdn.bootstrapcdn.com/bootstrap/3.3.7/js/bootstrap.min.js

Libraries
https://code.jquery.com/jquery-3.3.1.min.js" integrity="sha256-FgpCb/KJQlLNfOu91ta32o/NMZxltwRo8QtmkMRdAu8=" crossorigin="anonymous" https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/d3/3.5.5/d3.min.js d3.min.js crossfilter.min.js dc.min.js queue.min.js graph.js

Testing
To ensure any links were entered correctly it was common practice to consol.log a simple 'hello' to the console prior to commencing coding.

Testing has been conducted using google dev tools. Thorough testing in all the various mobile devices along with general responsiveness (responsive mode) has concluded that this site works well in all modern-day browsers and mobile devices. As part of the testing process each page has been reviewed systematically to ensure all links work as intended and the pages display correctly.

This testing has confirmed that users will be able to utilise the site as intended on any device (in landscape or portrait mode) to achieve their goals whilst enjoying the experience and customer journey.

All user forms display correctly and as intended on various displays / devices.

Autoprefixer was used to ensure CSS is compatible in multiple browsers: https://autoprefixer.github.io/

A common approach to testing code was to print to the console. This was particularly useful for testing conditions prior to adding additional code and for viewing variable or array values.

All CSS, HTML and JavaScript was run through code validators and flint to ensure any error were remedied.

Browser Compatibility Testing:
Issues Encountered
Time was invested at the start of the project to ensure HTML code and Bootstrap Classes were working as anticipated which saved some time on responsiveness testing during the latter stages of the build. One of the bootstrap defaults in my navbar was creating overflow Y so it was necessary to override the bootstrap style with custom CSS. On occasion this meant using ‘!Important’ to achieve this.

HTML and CSS Validators were used to clear any errors, however, CSS validation tends to highlight browser extensions as errors when they are actually required.

Jshint was utilised to check the quality of any Javascrip and jQuery and it revealed certain variables which were not actually being used which were subsequently removed. There were also various warnings for missing semi colons which have been rectified.

One issue encountered was with the brush effect on the 'Consolidated Sales' line graph. This issue appears to be intermittent and an issue with chrome rather than the underlying code. In order to investigate this the site was tested on other machines and browsers and in certain instances it was not possible to recreate the issue. That said this issue does not appear to impact the sites ability to function as intended.

Issues were encountered with the forms default reload behaviour which conflicted with the one page design. The following custom jQuery was written to prevent these issues:

$("form").on("submit", function(event) { event.preventDefault(); })

Some minor modifications were made to the layout of my design post wireframing which were straightforward to implement. This was done in order to achieve more balance visually.

It was necessary to take a different approach with regards the one page scrolling. Initially a combination of jQuery and CSS ('HTML Scroll Property') were utilised. It became clear during testing that this did not work on all browsers. The CSS HTML Scroll property has been removed and this animation effect is also handled by jQuery.

The dashboard did not run as intended on Mozilla Firefox version 64, however, updating to the latest version fixed the issue suggesting that the earlier version may have contained some bugs.

Internet Explorer does not support the Linear Gradient CSS property and consequently the background image did not display. To fix this issue the header iamge was edited outside of CSS using PINETOOLS editing online (https://pinetools.com/darken-image). Internet Explorer also required anditional CSS in order to display the various buttons on the page correctly (Position Relative) which was not required for any other browser.

On occassion the dashboard fails to load completely on Internet Explorer and the data table, data count and navigation buttons fail to load for no apparent reason. This issue only seems to occur in this browser. All the features function as normal on all other browsers including Microsoft Edge which is superseeding Internet Explorer. A number of sites no loner support Internet Explorer for this reason.

Deployment
Throughout the projects regular git commits were made to ensure any working files were backed up. Numerous commits have been logged on the main branch in GitHub. The project has been successfully deployed on GitHub pages.
There is only one main branch in GitHub for this project.

AWS cloud9 has been used throughout this project as the IDE of choice.

Issues were encountered when initially deploying the app to Heroku. This was due to Heroku detecing auto detecing Node and creating a Node Buildpack rather than a Python Buildpack. This was due to using Node Sass and including a package.json file as a result.  In order to rectify this the buildpack was manually deleted in Heroku and a python build pack was manually added.  The package.json file was then removed before pushing the app to Heroku.  After the app was successfully deployed the package.json file was reinstated.

File Structure
The project has been organised in the following structure:

milestone2 (Project Folder)
assets (folder)
css (folder)
data (folder)
davicon
js (folder)
vendor (folder)
images (folder)
video (folder)
Index.html and Readme.md are both located in the main project folder as are the wireframes for the initial design.

The vendor folder contains any 3rd party assets such as photos, video and audio materials for which proper approval has been attained prior to use.

Credits
The favicon was generated by a 3rd party site: https://favicon.io/favicon-generator/.

Images and Media
All images and media used on this site have been labelled for reuse / non-commercial and are for educational purposes only. Google images licensing tools have been utilised in sourcing content. Express consent has been attained via email for any other 3rd party content namely the video.